<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>
			<p>After dinner that night, in the living room the two older children studied their lessons and Edith sat mending a pair of rompers for little Tad. Presently Roger came out from his den with the evening paper in his hand and sat down close beside her. He did this conscientiously almost every evening. With a sigh he opened his paper to read, again there was silence in the room, and in this silence Roger’s mind roamed far away across the sea.</p>
			<p>For the front page of his paper was filled with the usual headlines, tidings which a year before would have made a man’s heart jump into his throat, but which were getting commonplace now. Dead and wounded by the thousands, famine, bombs and shrapnel, hideous atrocities, submarines and floating mines, words once remote but now familiar, always there on the front page and penetrating into his soul, becoming a part of Roger Gale, so that never again when the war was done would he be the same man he was before. For he had forever lost his faith in the sanity and steadiness of the great mind of humanity. Roger had thought of mankind as mature, but there had come to him of late the same feeling he had had before in the bosom of his family. Mankind had suddenly unmasked and shown itself for what it was⁠—still only a precocious child, with a terrible precocity. For its growth had been one sided. Its strength was growing at a speed breathless and astounding. But its vision and its poise, its sense of human justice, of kindliness and tolerance and of generous brotherly love, these had been neglected and were being left behind. Vaguely he thought of its ships of steel, its railroads and its flaming mills, its miracles, its prodigies. And the picture rose in his mind of a child, standing there of giant’s size with dangerous playthings in its hands, and boastfully declaring,</p>
			<p>“I can thunder over the earth, dive in the ocean, soar on the clouds! I can shiver to atoms a mountain, I can drench whole lands with blood! I can look up and laugh at God!”</p>
			<p>And Roger frowned as he read the news. What strange new century lay ahead? What convulsing throes of change? What was in store for his children? Tighter set his heavy jaw.</p>
			<p>“It shall be good,” he told himself with a grim determination. “For them there shall be better things. Something great and splendid shall come out of it at last. They will look back upon this time as I look on the French Revolution.”</p>
			<p>He tried to peer into that world ahead, dazzling, distant as the sun. But then with a sigh he returned to the news, and little by little his mind again was gripped and held by the most compelling of all appeals so far revealed in humanity’s growth, the appeal of war to the mind of a man. He frowned as he read, but he read on. Why didn’t England send over more men?</p>
			<p>The clock struck nine.</p>
			<p>“Now, George. Now, Elizabeth,” Edith said. With the usual delay and reluctance the children brought their work to an end, kissed their mother and went up to bed. And Edith continued sewing. Presently she smiled to herself. Little Tad had been so droll that day.</p>
			<p>On the third page of his paper, Roger’s glance was arrested by a full column story concerning Deborah’s meeting that night. And as in a long interview he read here in the public print the same things she had told him at supper, he felt a little glow of pride. Yes, this daughter of his was a wonderful woman, living a big useful life, taking a leading part in work which would certainly brighten the lives of millions of children still unborn. Again he felt the tonic of it. Here was a glimmer of hope in the world, here was an antidote to war. He finished the column and glanced up.</p>
			<p>Edith was still sewing. He thought of her plan to sell all she possessed in order to put her children back in their expensive schools uptown.</p>
			<p>“Why can’t she save her money?” he thought. “God knows there’s little enough of it left. But I can’t tell her that. If I do she’ll sell everything, hand me the cash and tell me she’s sorry to be such a burden. She’ll sit like a thundercloud in my house.”</p>
			<p>No, he could say nothing to stop her. And over the top of his paper her father shot a look at her of keen exasperation. Why risk everything she had to get these needless frills and fads? Why must she cram her life so full of petty plans and worries and titty-tatty little jobs? For the Lord’s sake, leave their clothes alone! And why these careful little rules for every minute of their day, for their washing, their dressing, their eating, their napping, their play and the very air they breathed! He crumpled his paper impatiently. She was always talking of being old-fashioned. Well then, why not be that way? Let her live as her grandmother had, up there in the mountain farmhouse. <em>She</em> had not been so particular. With one hired girl she had thought herself lucky. And not only had she cooked and sewed, but she had spun and woven too, had churned and made cheese and pickles and jam and quilts and even mattresses. Once in two months she had cut Roger’s hair, and the rest of the time she had let him alone, except for something really worth while⁠—a broken arm, for example, or church. She had stuck to the essentials!⁠ ⁠… But Edith was not old-fashioned, nor was she alive to this modern age. In short, she was neither here nor there!</p>
			<p>Then from the nursery above, her smallest boy was heard to cry. With a little sigh of weariness, quickly she rose and went upstairs, and a few moments later to Roger’s ears came a low, sweet, soothing lullaby. Years ago Edith had asked him to teach her some of his mother’s cradle songs. And the one which she was singing tonight was a song he had heard when he was small, when the mountain storms had shrieked and beat upon the rattling old house and he had been frightened and had cried out and his mother had come to his bed in the dark. He felt as though she were near him now. And as he listened to the song, from the deep well of sentiment which was a part of Roger Gale rose memories that changed his mood, and with it his sense of proportions.</p>
			<p>Here was motherhood of the genuine kind, not orating in Cooper Union in the name of every child in New York, but crooning low and tenderly, soothing one little child to sleep, one of the five she herself had borne, in agony, without complaint. How Edith had slaved and sacrificed, how bravely she had rallied after the death of her husband. He remembered her a few hours ago on the bed upstairs, spent and in anguish, sobbing, alone. And remorse came over him. Deborah’s talk at dinner had twisted his thinking, he told himself. Well, that was Deborah’s way of life. She had her enormous family and Edith had her small one, and in this hell of misery which war was spreading over the earth each mother was up in arms for her brood. And, by George, of the two he didn’t know but that he preferred his own flesh and blood. All very noble, Miss Deborah, and very dramatic, to open your arms to all the children under the moon and get your name in the papers. But there was something pretty fine in just sitting at home and singing to one.</p>
			<p>“All right, little mother, you go straight ahead. This is war and panic and hard times. You’re perfectly right to look after your own.”</p>
			<p>He would show Edith he did not begrudge her this use of her small property. And more than that, he would do what he could to take her out of her loneliness. How about reading aloud to her? He had been a capital reader, during Judith’s lifetime, for he had always enjoyed it so. Roger rose and went to his shelves and began to look over the volumes there. Perhaps a book of travel.⁠ ⁠… Stoddard’s “Lectures on Japan.”</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Edith came into the room, sat down and took up her sewing. As she did so he turned and glanced at her, and she smiled brightly back at him. Yes, he thought with a genial glow, from this night on he would do his part. He came back to his chair with a book in his hand, prepared to start on his new course.</p>
			<p>“Father,” she said quietly. Her eyes were on the work in her lap.</p>
			<p>“Yes, my child, what is it?”</p>
			<p>“It’s about John,” she answered. And with a movement of alarm he looked at his daughter intently.</p>
			<p>“What’s the matter with John?” he inquired.</p>
			<p>“He has tuberculosis,” she said.</p>
			<p>“He has no such thing!” her father retorted. “John has Pott’s Disease of the spine!”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I know he has,” she replied. “And I’m sorry for him, poor lad. But in the last year,” she added, “certain complications have come. And now he’s tubercular as well.”</p>
			<p>“How do you know? He doesn’t cough⁠—his lungs are sound as yours or mine!”</p>
			<p>“No, it’s⁠—” Edith pursed her lips. “It’s different,” she said softly.</p>
			<p>“Who told you?” he demanded.</p>
			<p>“Not Deborah,” was the quick response. “She knew it, I’m certain, for I find that she’s been having <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Neale, the woman who comes in to wash, do John’s things in a separate tub. I found her doing it yesterday, and she told me what Deborah had said.”</p>
			<p>“It’s the first I’d heard of it,” Roger put in.</p>
			<p>“I know it is,” she answered. “For if you’d heard of it before, I don’t believe you’d have been as ready as Deborah was, apparently, to risk infecting the children here.” Edith’s voice was gentle, slow and relentless. There was still a reflection in her eyes of the tenderness which had been there as she had soothed her child to sleep. “As time goes on, John is bound to get worse. The risk will be greater every week.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, pshaw!” cried her father. “No such thing! You’re just scaring yourself over nothing at all!”</p>
			<p>“Doctor Lake didn’t think I was.” Lake was the big child specialist in whose care Edith’s children had been for years. “I talked to him today on the telephone, and he said we should get John out of the house.”</p>
			<p>Roger heartily damned Doctor Lake!</p>
			<p>“It’s easy to find a good home for the boy,” Edith went on quietly, “close by, if you like⁠—in some respectable family that will be only too thankful to take in a boarder.”</p>
			<p>“How about the danger to that family’s children?” Roger asked malignantly.</p>
			<p>“Very well, father, do as you please. Take any risk you want to.”</p>
			<p>“I’m taking no risk,” he retorted. “If there were any risk they would have told me⁠—Allan and Deborah would, I mean.”</p>
			<p>“They wouldn’t!” burst from Edith with a vehemence which startled him. “They’d take the same risk for my children they would for any street urchin in town! All children are the same in their eyes⁠—and if you feel as they do⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I don’t feel as they do!”</p>
			<p>“Don’t you? Then I’m telling you that Doctor Lake said there was very serious risk⁠—every day this boy remains in the house!” Roger rose angrily from his chair:</p>
			<p>“So you want me to turn him out! Tonight!”</p>
			<p>“No, I want you to wait a few days⁠—until we can find him a decent home.”</p>
			<p>“All right, I won’t do it!”</p>
			<p>“Very well, father⁠—it’s your house, not mine.”</p>
			<p>For a few moments longer she sat at her sewing, while her father walked the floor. Then abruptly she rose, her eyes brimming with tears, and left the room. And he heard a sob as she went upstairs.</p>
			<p>“Now she’ll shut herself up with her children,” he reflected savagely, “and hold the fort till I come to terms!” Rather than risk a hair on their heads, Edith would turn the whole world out of doors! He thought of Deborah and he groaned. She would have to be told of this; and when she was, what a row there would be! For Johnny was one of <em>her</em> family. He glanced at the clock. She’d be coming home soon. Should he tell her? Not tonight! Just for one evening he’d had enough!</p>
			<p>He picked up the book he had meant to read⁠—Stoddard’s “Lectures on Japan.” And Roger snorted wrathfully. By George, how <em>he’d</em> like to go to Japan⁠—or to darkest Africa! Anywhere!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
